[Unknown]: I. V. M.
[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other night.
[Amit Varma]: I had been called to the PMO for dinner with the Prime Minister.
[Amit Varma]: Modiji was there, Jaitleyji was there, Hasmukhbhai was there.
[Amit Varma]: Modiji was at his hospitable best, starting me off with some cheese and white wine.
[Amit Varma]: He told me,
[Amit Varma]: We don't serve red wine.
[Amit Varma]: Ha ha ha ha ha.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, once I was suitably lubricated,
[Amit Varma]: Modiji leaned forward and said,
[Amit Varma]: Amit, you are the economic commentator I respect most in this country.
[Amit Varma]: From day one of demonetization, you got it right.
[Amit Varma]: You wrote about what a disaster it was.
[Amit Varma]: For many years, you have been the wisest one.
[Amit Varma]: So now tell me, O great soul, O fountain of knowledge,
[Amit Varma]: what is the state of the economy like in India?
[Amit Varma]: I replied,
[Amit Varma]: Namo, bro, I gotta be honest with you.
[Amit Varma]: Things are a mess.
[Amit Varma]: Demon screwed the informal sector and small businesses.
[Amit Varma]: GST with all these slabs and exemptions, even worse.
[Amit Varma]: Red tape has gone up.
[Amit Varma]: Compliance is hard.
[Amit Varma]: A new Inspector Raj is being unleashed.
[Amit Varma]: Exporters are suffering.
[Amit Varma]: Small businesses are suffering.
[Amit Varma]: It's a mess.
[Amit Varma]: Then he said,
[Amit Varma]: This bloody economy.
[Amit Varma]: I have such great speech writers and social media trolls.
[Amit Varma]: And still the economy is not doing well.
[Amit Varma]: It baffles me.
[Amit Varma]: I need food.
[Amit Varma]: Jaitleyji rang a bell
[Amit Varma]: and an eminent economist wearing a waiter's uniform walked in.
[Amit Varma]: He said to Modiji,
[Amit Varma]: Kya lau sir?
[Amit Varma]: Whatever you want, I will bring it for you.
[Amit Varma]: Modiji whispered something in his ear.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't quite make out what he said.
[Amit Varma]: And then he elaborated,
[Amit Varma]: And make sure it's medium rare.
[Amit Varma]: Hare Modiji, I said.
[Amit Varma]: What is it that you're eating?
[Amit Varma]: Modiji said,
[Amit Varma]: Amit, my boy.
[Amit Varma]: Why so serious? Don't be shocked.
[Amit Varma]: We all worship in our own way.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode,
[Amit Varma]: I want to do a roundup of the state of the Indian economy.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the economy is not doing very well.
[Amit Varma]: And many of the things wrong with it are the Unseen effects.
[Amit Varma]: Of demonetization and GST.
[Amit Varma]: Before I bring in my guest for today,
[Amit Varma]: I want to spend a little while talking about each of these.
[Amit Varma]: As Modiji mentioned in my dream,
[Amit Varma]: I have been writing against demon from day one in publications like
[Amit Varma]: The Times of India and The Hindu Business Line.
[Amit Varma]: The second episode of The Seen and The Unseen was on demonetization.
[Amit Varma]: My guest in that was Suyash Rai.
[Amit Varma]: You can check out the archives at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Some people say that demon was a good idea that was implemented badly.
[Amit Varma]: This is nonsense. It was a terrible idea from the start.
[Amit Varma]: This is mainly because it was not an attack on high denomination notes to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: In 1978, when the last demonetization happened,
[Amit Varma]: the notes that were demonetized were only 0.6% of the notes in circulation.
[Amit Varma]: They were basically used to store money and not to actually spend it.
[Amit Varma]: By contrast, this time, 1000 rupee and 500 rupee notes
[Amit Varma]: constituted 86% of the money supply
[Amit Varma]: and are used by the common man and the rich.
[Amit Varma]: Used by the common man for daily transactions.
[Amit Varma]: Modiji may not have bought something from a store for a couple of decades
[Amit Varma]: and probably didn't know this sitting in his ivory tower.
[Amit Varma]: And from the insider accounts I have heard,
[Amit Varma]: he also didn't consult any of the eminent economists who worked with him.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, so overnight there was a shortage of cash
[Amit Varma]: and hundreds of millions of people had to queue up for hours
[Amit Varma]: to get a hand on their own money.
[Amit Varma]: This was easily the largest assault on property rights in human history.
[Amit Varma]: The informal sector depends on cash and was crippled by this.
[Amit Varma]: Small businesses everywhere were hurt.
[Amit Varma]: And as expected, our GDP growth rate suffered as well.
[Amit Varma]: Demon was supposed to attack black money,
[Amit Varma]: but it was estimated at the time that only 6% of the black money
[Amit Varma]: was stored in the form of cash.
[Amit Varma]: And even that got neatly laundered.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, demonetization crippled our economy and achieved absolutely nothing.
[Amit Varma]: For more details on this too, listen to my February episode on this
[Amit Varma]: with Suresh Rai at cnunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: I've done two episodes on GST,
[Amit Varma]: first with Devangshu Dutta and then with Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: My episode with Devangshu happened before GST was implemented.
[Amit Varma]: And Devangshu warned that if there were too many slabs and exemptions,
[Amit Varma]: it might defeat the whole purpose.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek did an episode with me after GST was implemented
[Amit Varma]: and the problems with it were exactly as Devangshu had feared.
[Amit Varma]: Too many slabs and exemptions that made it the opposite of a good and simple tax.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, there were now so many regulations that compliance was hard and time-consuming
[Amit Varma]: and observers feared that a new Inspector Raj may well be on the way.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, my guest on the show today is Vivek Kaul himself,
[Amit Varma]: a prolific author and columnist for Equity Master
[Amit Varma]: and, much to my good fortune, a frequent guest on The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, welcome back to the show.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit, for having me over.
[Amit Varma]: So, Vivek, you've been writing about the economy 4-5 times a week,
[Amit Varma]: more than that, you write so many columns and are prolific across so many websites,
[Amit Varma]: besides the work you do for Equity Master.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, for the last few months,
[Amit Varma]: you've been coming up with the most detailed, updated reports on what's been going on.
[Amit Varma]: What is the state of the Indian economy right now?
[Guest]: I mean, we're probably in the worst state that we have been in almost one and a half years.
[Guest]: I mean, the last GDP data that came out for the period April to June 2017,
[Guest]: the growth was at 5.7%.
[Guest]: Now, what this figure does not tell you is that this growth was pumped up
[Guest]: because of, you know, a dramatic increase in government expenditure.
[Guest]: So, if you strip out the government part of the economy,
[Guest]: which typically tends to be around 9-10%, but now is around 13%,
[Guest]: the non-government part of the economy grew by around 4.3%.
[Guest]: So, which is very, very worrying.
[Guest]: And it's fallen from around, it's come down from around 9%,
[Guest]: you know, as of March 2016, to around 4.3%.
[Amit Varma]: From 9% to 4.3%.
[Amit Varma]: So, just put this in context for me. Typically, what is the kind of growth rate
[Amit Varma]: for any given quarter that we've been experiencing over the last few years?
[Guest]: Okay, so this, you know, we grew by around 9% as of March 2016.
[Guest]: And after that, you know, the growth has started to fall.
[Amit Varma]: And to take you a little further back, what was it like during the UPA's time, for example?
[Guest]: So, you really cannot compare because, okay, the UPA for the last three years,
[Guest]: you know, we have data from around, I'll tell you,
[Guest]: we have data from January, no, from March 2012.
[Guest]: So, the growth was around 5% to 6%.
[Guest]: Before that, we do not have data because, you know,
[Guest]: we moved on to a new GDP series in January 2015.
[Guest]: And for that, you know, the data is available only from 2012 onwards.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, I'm trying to get a sense of how the economy reacted
[Amit Varma]: after the Modi government took power in 2014.
[Guest]: So, basically, you know, the initial response was good.
[Guest]: And then, you know, somewhere in early 2016, the growth started to come down.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And also, one way in which the Modi government has been very lucky is with oil prices. I mean, you've written,
[Amit Varma]: you wrote a piece for this on the website, I added Pragati, I think Pragati.com,
[Amit Varma]: on how a lot of the good economic figures under this government have come fortuitously
[Amit Varma]: because the oil prices happen to be really low.
[Guest]: Actually, you know, as Amit Shah said, because of technical reasons.
[Guest]: So, I mean, so the way it is, you know, imports are a negative entry into the GDP formula.
[Guest]: So, if oil prices fall, your oil imports in dollar terms or in rupee terms also fall.
[Guest]: So, the moment that happens, your GDP goes up automatically.
[Guest]: So, as Mr. Shah said, due to technical reasons.
[Guest]: So, this is exactly where these technical reasons come in.
[Amit Varma]: So, now going back into the last 18 months or so, since, you know, the last year and a half,
[Amit Varma]: what has been happening in the economy?
[Guest]: Say, you know, one factor which is people have gradually started to realize
[Guest]: and which they were not realizing earlier is the fact that we are not creating enough jobs.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Okay, there are estimates suggest that around a million Indians are entering the workforce every month.
[Guest]: And we've done a podcast on this previously where we discussed it.
[Guest]: So, and, you know, the problem is that this is now, I mean, it's coming to the fore,
[Guest]: wherein, you know, the media is writing about it and people are talking about it.
[Guest]: But nothing seems to be happening, you know, around it on the government front.
[Guest]: I mean, the entire, you know, the explanations that are coming from the government
[Guest]: seem to be telling us that all is well and, you know, we don't need to worry,
[Guest]: which isn't really true because the numbers don't show that.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And how would you sum up the impact of demonetization to begin with and then GST in the economy?
[Amit Varma]: For example, typically, it takes a long, long time for all the relevant data to actually get in.
[Amit Varma]: And what complicates this further, obviously, is that demon affected the informal sector really hard
[Amit Varma]: and their data itself is a problem to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: So, how do you begin to estimate what the impact is? What do we have so far?
[Guest]: So, you know, a lot of data has started to come in.
[Guest]: So, the first thing I would like to say is, you know, if you look at the crash in food prices,
[Guest]: the major reason for that is demonetization.
[Guest]: Because most of the agriculture trade in India worked on cash.
[Guest]: And the moment that cash was taken out of the system, the buying and selling simply stopped.
[Guest]: And farmers had to sort of sell their produce at very, very low prices.
[Guest]: So, one of the stories that minted was about this farmer who had to sell his,
[Guest]: you know, he had grown potatoes this year and this was sometime in March.
[Guest]: And he had to sell his potatoes for as low as 9 paisa a kg.
[Guest]: Whereas it takes around 3 rupees to produce 1 kg of potato.
[Guest]: That's one part.
[Guest]: The second part is if you look at the crash in, you know, the price of pulses.
[Guest]: So, you know, what has been, so, you know, we need to understand as to
[Guest]: how does a farmer actually decide what to produce in a given year.
[Guest]: You know, he basically looks at the prices, you know, last year and then he decides.
[Guest]: So, you know, the price of pulses have been going up for a while.
[Guest]: So, this season there was a huge increase in production of pulses.
[Amit Varma]: But there were no buyers. So, the prices...
[Guest]: And no buyers because basically no cash, essentially.
[Guest]: So, now, then if you remember, you know, the price of tomatoes crossed 100 rupees a kg.
[Guest]: Now, how did that happen?
[Guest]: That happened because, you know, there was a bumper crop of tomatoes in November, December.
[Guest]: And because there was no cash in the system, the prices crashed.
[Guest]: So, once the prices crashed, for the next cycle, the farmers simply decided not to, you know, grow any tomatoes.
[Guest]: So, because of that, the prices went up.
[Guest]: So, if, you know, if you were to sort of extend the tomato example into pulses,
[Guest]: my guess is next year, you know, the price of pulses will go up again
[Guest]: because farmers this year will not plot as much as, you know, they did last year.
[Amit Varma]: And are minimum support prices relevant to pulses?
[Guest]: Not really. Minimum support prices are basically relevant to only rice and wheat.
[Guest]: Then there is a third, another kind of price which is set,
[Guest]: I think it's called fair and remunerative price, which is set in case of sugarcane.
[Guest]: So, but that's a different story altogether.
[Amit Varma]: So, just to kind of demystify this, would it then be that because there was a massive reduction in the money supply,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, that had a deflationary effect?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, now, you know, just to sort of, for the listeners who may not be following monetary economics,
[Amit Varma]: a friend once asked me recently that, hey, you know, if the government needs to spend more money,
[Amit Varma]: why don't they just print more money?
[Amit Varma]: But what typically happens if they print more money is that the number of goods and services are what they are,
[Amit Varma]: but you have more money chasing it, so its demand and supply, the price of everything,
[Amit Varma]: just goes up and the result is inflation.
[Amit Varma]: And when the government prints money, it's basically creating inflation, which is a tax on the poor.
[Amit Varma]: And here this has the opposite effect where you take a lot of money out of the system
[Amit Varma]: and you have much less money chasing certain goods and services
[Amit Varma]: and therefore they become much cheaper and in this case hurting the farmers more.
[Guest]: I can give you a better example here.
[Guest]: You know, sometime in the Second World War, you know, there used to be prisoners of wars.
[Guest]: So, within the prison, there was no cash going around.
[Guest]: So, cigarettes became a form of money.
[Guest]: So, the prisoners used to get cigarettes through the rations that arrived through the Red Cross
[Guest]: or, you know, if some stuff got sent by relatives.
[Guest]: So, typically what used to happen was that when the Red Cross rations came,
[Guest]: suddenly everybody had cigarettes and they used to start using those cigarettes to exchange,
[Guest]: you know, for a cup of coffee or tea and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Now, because there was a sudden increase in the inflow of cigarettes,
[Guest]: the prices of, you know, coffee and tea used to go up
[Guest]: in the sense that, you know, earlier maybe two cigarettes for a coffee
[Guest]: and, you know, after the inflow of cigarettes, it used to become three cigarettes for a coffee.
[Amit Varma]: That's one part.
[Guest]: The other part is there used to be, some days there used to be bombings
[Guest]: or it was simply so cold that people just smoked away their cigarettes.
[Guest]: So, then suddenly there was a contraction in the number of cigarettes available in the prison economy
[Guest]: and the prices used to come down because the holders of, you know, tea, coffee
[Guest]: or whatever they were trying to sell essentially, you know,
[Guest]: wanted to ensure that their products did not spoil
[Guest]: and so they had to cut prices in order to attract people
[Guest]: who were still left with cigarettes to spend those cigarettes.
[Amit Varma]: That's a brilliant illustration of the money supply and that is actually a good reason,
[Amit Varma]: another good reason to say cigarette smoking is injurious to health
[Amit Varma]: because, hey, you're burning money, literally in that case.
[Amit Varma]: So, this is one thing that happened that because of money supply,
[Amit Varma]: because the amount of cash in the economy drastically went down,
[Amit Varma]: prices, of course, crashed and farmers got screwed
[Amit Varma]: and then this changed the incentives for the next cycle of crops.
[Amit Varma]: So, when they couldn't get any money for the tomatoes, for example,
[Amit Varma]: their incentives changed and they didn't grow tomatoes the next time around,
[Amit Varma]: which then led to a scarcity of tomatoes and, you know, by the time…
[Guest]: So, see, the point here is, you know, when it comes to Indian agriculture,
[Guest]: the markets anyway don't work and whatever little the markets were working,
[Guest]: demonetization essentially ensured that those markets also don't work.
[Guest]: So, if you don't allow the market to work, I mean, there will be a cost to pay at the end of the day.
[Amit Varma]: So, moving from agriculture to the informal sector in terms of small manufacturers
[Amit Varma]: and businesses and all that, how did demonetization affect those?
[Guest]: So, this is a very, you know, I mean, we all know that demonetization essentially
[Guest]: ended up hurting the informal sector particularly in a very bad way,
[Guest]: because informal sector works largely on cash
[Guest]: and the moment you take that cash out of the market, they essentially collapsed.
[Guest]: Now, so that's that, I mean, that's very well known.
[Guest]: Now, what has happened is, you know, I just noticed this particular data point
[Guest]: that I'll talk about around a month back.
[Guest]: So, obviously, you know, the country imports a lot of stuff.
[Guest]: India does and our biggest imports are oil and gold.
[Guest]: Now, oil we import because, you know, we sort of produce only 20% of the oil that we consume
[Guest]: and gold we import because we produce almost, you know, nothing.
[Guest]: I mean, so we have to import all the gold that we consume.
[Guest]: Now, if you strip out gold, oil and silver from the total import numbers,
[Guest]: what remains with you is, you know, the technical term for it is non-oil, non-gold, non-silver imports.
[Guest]: Now, these imports are a very good indicator of consumer demand in the country.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at the growth in non-gold, non-oil, non-silver imports since November,
[Guest]: there has been a huge jump.
[Guest]: Before November, these imports were actually in the negative territory.
[Guest]: But after November, they have like really perked up.
[Guest]: Now, what is happening here?
[Guest]: It's a very interesting question as to why, you know, how does the scenario change so quickly.
[Guest]: So, what is happening here is because of demonetization,
[Guest]: the informal sector has sort of been destroyed, the supply chains have been destroyed
[Guest]: and those, you know, the products that these informal firms were selling
[Guest]: are now coming into the import route.
[Guest]: So, basically, you know, we have ended up importing stuff
[Guest]: that we were essentially buying from within the country.
[Amit Varma]: So, it's essentially for all that Modi says about make in India,
[Amit Varma]: what demonetization essentially promoted was don't make in India.
[Guest]: Or rather, you know, make outside India and create jobs outside India.
[Guest]: That's the bigger irony.
[Guest]: So, yeah, now, if this were to sort of stop at this, it would be fine.
[Guest]: But then again, the jump in non-gold, non-silver, non-oil imports
[Guest]: was one unseen effect of demonetization.
[Guest]: Now, there is an unseen effect of this unseen effect.
[Amit Varma]: So, we are basically in cascading unseen effect.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, this is the double derivative.
[Guest]: So, d dx of dy by dx or something like that.
[Guest]: So, anyway, so what has happened is that now because the economy is not doing well,
[Guest]: you know, when the economy doesn't do well,
[Guest]: economists and politicians go back to that, you know, one economist, John Maynard Keynes.
[Guest]: Now, John Maynard Keynes, you know, in 1936, in his magnum opus,
[Guest]: The General Theory of Money, Interest and Employment,
[Guest]: essentially suggested that when the economy is not doing well,
[Guest]: when the private sector is not spending enough money,
[Guest]: the government should cut tax rates.
[Guest]: He also suggested that the governments should spend more money
[Guest]: during that period than they, you know, than they spend in other periods.
[Guest]: So, this is something that politicians and economists have latched on to since 1936
[Guest]: and every time an economy is in trouble anywhere in the world,
[Guest]: this is the first suggestion that is given.
[Guest]: Now, it needs to be explained here that, you know,
[Guest]: when Keynes was making these suggestions,
[Guest]: the governments did not run fiscal deficits.
[Guest]: That is what used to happen back then was that their income was equal to their expenditure.
[Guest]: So, Keynes' argument was that you essentially accumulate money when the going is good
[Guest]: and then you spend it when the going is not so good.
[Guest]: But what happened was people just ran with one part of the argument and,
[Guest]: you know, the government should spend money when the going is not good.
[Guest]: Anyway, so to get back to the point, now with the economy not doing well,
[Guest]: obviously all these economists and, you know, some politicians also have been suggesting
[Guest]: that the government should spend more money than it is actually spending.
[Guest]: Even though the Economic Advisory Council of the Prime Minister,
[Guest]: which was recently set up, has advised against it.
[Guest]: So, as far as government spending is concerned,
[Guest]: if you look at data for the first five months of the year,
[Guest]: the government is already spending much more than it usually spends.
[Guest]: So, you get, you know, fiscal deficit data every month.
[Guest]: So, if you look at the period between April to August,
[Guest]: we have already, you know, we are already at 96% of the fiscal deficit
[Guest]: which was targeted for the entire year.
[Guest]: So, which basically means that the government is spending much more than it actually spends.
[Amit Varma]: And when it spends much more than it actually, than it gets in,
[Amit Varma]: what it's essentially doing is borrowing from future generations, right,
[Amit Varma]: kicking the can down the road.
[Guest]: So, some sort of stimulus is already, some sort of fiscal expansion,
[Guest]: fiscal stimulus is already on.
[Guest]: Now, what remains to be seen is whether the government continues to spend money at this rate.
[Guest]: So, if it continues to spend money at this rate, then, you know,
[Guest]: the targeted fiscal deficit for the year is around 3.2% of the GDP
[Guest]: and it will end up at around 4% of the GDP.
[Guest]: Now, that's a call that the government needs to make
[Guest]: whether they want to increase the fiscal deficit
[Guest]: or they want to meet the fiscal deficit target.
[Guest]: Now, so typically, you know, the way this works is that
[Guest]: when the government spends money, you know, somebody's income goes up
[Guest]: and then that income translates into consumer demand
[Guest]: and when, you know, consumer demand goes up,
[Guest]: the private sector starts to do well
[Guest]: and so the economic growth sort of comes back.
[Amit Varma]: That's a theory.
[Guest]: Yes, and I mean, as the sort of private sector does well,
[Guest]: the government also gets, you know, greater share of taxes and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: The problem here is that, you know, what has happened, you know,
[Guest]: as we all know, in the Indian cases, because of demonetization,
[Guest]: the large part of the small, you know, and medium enterprises
[Guest]: and the informal sector has been destroyed.
[Guest]: Now, let's say if the government were to continue to spend more money,
[Guest]: okay, what would happen is that, obviously,
[Guest]: it would translate into some sort of consumer demand.
[Guest]: Now, the thing is whether that consumer demand would be met
[Guest]: through stuff which is produced within the country
[Guest]: or stuff which is not produced within the country, okay.
[Guest]: Now, given the trend of non-gold, non-silver and non-oil imports going up,
[Guest]: what that tells us is that up until now, the consumer demand,
[Guest]: a lot of it is not being met through what is being produced in the country, right.
[Guest]: So, if we sort of extend that logic, you know,
[Guest]: the government spending more will end up, you know,
[Guest]: leading to consumer demand which is fulfilled through imports, okay.
[Guest]: Now, imports, as we know, are a negative entry into the GDP formula,
[Amit Varma]: again, technical reasons.
[Amit Varma]: That's a technical reason.
[Guest]: Technical reasons, as Mr. Amit Shah said.
[Guest]: So, because imports are a negative entry,
[Guest]: what would happen is that, you know,
[Guest]: the government spending more money instead of leading to
[Guest]: an increase in economic growth would actually pull it down.
[Guest]: So, this is, you know, one unseen effect on top of
[Guest]: the other unseen effect of demonetization.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, you know, I would not be against imports at all.
[Amit Varma]: It's perfectly fine, you know.
[Amit Varma]: But what is perverse in this case is that you're destroying livelihoods
[Amit Varma]: and businesses which were already running within the country
[Amit Varma]: and then imports go up as a result of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the important thing here to note is that a lot of the small businesses
[Amit Varma]: or the small enterprises affected by demonetization,
[Amit Varma]: for them it wasn't just a matter of,
[Amit Varma]: oh, we've had two or three bad months and then we'll eventually come back
[Amit Varma]: and it's short-term pain.
[Amit Varma]: What happens is that on the margins when businesses get wiped out,
[Amit Varma]: you can't come back again.
[Amit Varma]: You're gone.
[Amit Varma]: I think the term economists use for it is a welfare shock.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a damage which really in some ways is immeasurable.
[Guest]: Yes, because, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: what the government data essentially measures at the end of the day is,
[Guest]: you know, businesses and firms which are a part of the formal setup.
[Guest]: But the informal setup is really very badly measured.
[Guest]: So at the end of the day, you know,
[Guest]: we will really never be able to sort of figure out
[Guest]: as to what was the actual cost.
[Amit Varma]: Right, and as my friend Nitin Pai of the Takshashila Institution
[Amit Varma]: once pointed out that a 1% rise in GDP
[Amit Varma]: typically brings 2 million people out of poverty in India.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the opportunity cost of that rise not happening
[Amit Varma]: or the GDP growth being less than expected is that
[Amit Varma]: it has a real impact on real human beings.
[Guest]: Which is true.
[Guest]: I mean, see, it's like, you know, it's very simple.
[Guest]: If India grows at 6% for a year over the next, let's say, 20-25 years
[Guest]: in comparison to if it grows at 8%,
[Guest]: obviously, you know, many more people will be pulled out of poverty
[Guest]: if India grows at 8% and then if India grows at 6%.
[Guest]: So what is obviously important here is that, you know,
[Guest]: if the government cannot create right situations for economic growth,
[Guest]: they should at least not create situations which hurt economic growth.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting because there is almost a canard spread by some people
[Amit Varma]: that, oh, look, that, you know, Modi, he's doing so much damage on the social front,
[Amit Varma]: all the lynchings and the cow business and all that, all in the name of development and economy.
[Amit Varma]: But if you actually evaluate his economic performance,
[Amit Varma]: you know, especially over the last year and a half,
[Amit Varma]: things have just gone drastically wrong.
[Amit Varma]: He's taking the country backwards.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving demonetization apart,
[Amit Varma]: let's move on to something that we discussed a few episodes ago,
[Amit Varma]: which is sort of the impact of GST on the economy,
[Amit Varma]: which is kind of becoming clearer.
[Amit Varma]: And what is your overall take now?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, you know, whatever I said at that point of time continues to be true.
[Guest]: I mean, but, you know, the one new thing that I've realized
[Guest]: is which is sort of causing a lot of problems
[Guest]: is the fact that the GST essentially has led to a situation
[Guest]: where one too many returns need to be filed.
[Guest]: You know, there are people who are perpetually filing returns all through the month.
[Guest]: I mean, like, I need to file three returns.
[Guest]: And even that at sometimes, you know, becomes a pain.
[Guest]: Like, you know, one of the returns is an expense statement that needs to be filed.
[Guest]: Now I need to file my expense statements 12 times a year.
[Guest]: So obviously, you know, one can understand what the government is trying to do.
[Guest]: I mean, they're obviously trying to sort of build a database
[Guest]: and then figure out, you know, who are the people who are not paying their fair share of taxes.
[Guest]: But then again, you have to be, you know,
[Guest]: you have to realize the fact that it takes a lot of time and energy
[Guest]: from what is actually not a core activity.
[Guest]: I mean, for a businessman or a self-employed individual,
[Guest]: he would rather sort of concentrate on what he does well rather than on these things.
[Amit Varma]: You're wasting an enormous amount of productive time just doing this.
[Guest]: What has also happened is, again, I mean, this is anecdotal,
[Guest]: and I mean, I don't have agglomerated data to back what I say,
[Guest]: is that I think chartered accountants are finding it difficult
[Guest]: to handle the volume of work that GST has created.
[Unknown]: Now to give you a very simple example,
[Guest]: you know, you need a lot of data entry operators now.
[Guest]: I mean, you don't expect a chartered accountant to sit and enter data.
[Guest]: So from what I understand, there is a shortage of good data entry operators.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, you need someone who understands some amount of English.
[Unknown]: He understands, you know, this is Excel and, you know, this is basically,
[Guest]: you know, you need someone who at least you understand a few basic things.
[Guest]: And it has become a little difficult to find such individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And I think over time, the scene effect of this,
[Amit Varma]: and some might pom-pom me to say that, hey, there are more data operators,
[Amit Varma]: and we've created good jobs.
[Guest]: Yes, but then you realize that, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, yes, there are more data operators,
[Guest]: and work has been created for chartered accountants.
[Guest]: But then there are so many people who are not doing what they should be doing,
[Guest]: and, you know, just looking at the fact that the entire return is filed properly.
[Amit Varma]: And the extra money that people are spending on their chartered accountants
[Amit Varma]: and GST consultants and so on, is money that they would have spent elsewhere
[Guest]: and would have been put to productive use.
[Guest]: Which is the basic point of the unseen effect anyway.
[Amit Varma]: Which is the basic point of the unseen effect.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, looking forward, what is sort of your prognosis in the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: let's say the year and a half to come, let's say till 2019 when the next elections happen.
[Amit Varma]: Is the worst behind us?
[Amit Varma]: Because the government at some point will start fixing some of the glitches of GST as well, at least.
[Guest]: Which they have, they have started.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, they have started that and you don't really expect things to really get worse.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is that the impact of Demon and the…
[Guest]: See, the, yeah, I mean, economic growth has been falling for six quarters now.
[Guest]: So, six quarters is a reasonably long time.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not a small…
[Guest]: So, the point is, I mean, a lot of damage has already been done.
[Guest]: Now, whether this damage will continue, I mean, for that,
[Guest]: I mean, it's difficult to sort of say offhand.
[Guest]: But, you know, if you look at other high frequency data,
[Guest]: I mean, things, some things are improving.
[Guest]: It's not like everything's going to the dogs,
[Guest]: but a lot of things are in an extremely negative territory.
[Guest]: So, one of the data points which I came across recently is,
[Guest]: you know, we all know that bank lending is in a bad state.
[Guest]: So, you know, bank lending to agriculture is down, bank lending to retail is flat,
[Guest]: bank lending to industry, you know, has contracted.
[Guest]: But bank lending to services this year has fallen more than bank lending to any other sector.
[Guest]: Why is that?
[Unknown]: I have no idea. I need to dig a little deeper.
[Guest]: Now, the point is that services form around half of the economy
[Guest]: and if services firms are not borrowing,
[Guest]: there is something which is really not right.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, I need to dig a little deeper.
[Amit Varma]: Is it that they are not borrowing because they don't see a scope for expansion?
[Guest]: I don't know. I mean, which could be one reason or I don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, there's no demand.
[Guest]: So, one has to sort of see, I mean, if you, you know, go back to Mr. Modi's speech recently.
[Guest]: So, he said, you know, car sales are going up and motorcycle sales are going up
[Guest]: and tractor sales went up by 34% in a month.
[Guest]: But then these are not the, you know, he pointed out a spate of positive data points,
[Guest]: but he did not point out a spate of negative data points also, which are there.
[Guest]: Right. I mean, you know, your cement consumption for one,
[Guest]: I mean, I can tell you offhand, has come down.
[Guest]: The real estate sector, which sort of is, you know,
[Guest]: should have been the main sector to create jobs for the unskilled,
[Guest]: is, continues to be down in the dumps.
[Guest]: So, I mean, so the point is that there are enough, I mean, negative data points going around as well.
[Guest]: So, even if there is a recovery, I don't see a fast recovery happening.
[Guest]: I mean, it will be as slow as...
[Amit Varma]: And it's probably true even if the government gets everything right from now on.
[Amit Varma]: That, you know, given where we are, it's just really difficult to climb out of this.
[Guest]: Yes, I mean, because a lot of these, see, what has typically always happened in India's case
[Guest]: is that whenever we have done well, you know, grown at 8 and 9 percent,
[Guest]: the structural issues have held us back.
[Guest]: So, these are, you know, the structural issues are now coming to the fore all over again.
[Guest]: I mean, something as basic as our roads, our turnaround time of our ports.
[Guest]: Because if you realize, you know, globally the economies are doing much better
[Guest]: than they were, let's say, three years back.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. I mean, in 2011, you could say that, hey, you know, there's a global downswing
[Amit Varma]: and everyone's doing badly and if India's kind of...
[Amit Varma]: It's fine, it's understandable.
[Amit Varma]: But right now, the rest of the world is all looking up and India's kind of lagging behind.
[Guest]: So, I mean, so look at something like, you know, the banking crisis.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not like it's suddenly come up.
[Guest]: It's been there from day one.
[Guest]: And nothing's been... I mean, nothing's been done other than getting the companies to sort of...
[Guest]: Sorry, getting the banks to recognize their bad loans as bad loans.
[Guest]: And even that number keeps going up every quarter.
[Guest]: So, either, you know, if you look at some of these banks...
[Guest]: So, there are these five associate banks of State Bank of India
[Guest]: and the Bharatiya Mahila Bank, which were merged with State Bank of India.
[Guest]: And State Bank of India, as of March 31st, was the second best, you know,
[Guest]: performing bank among the public sector banks when it came to their bad loans.
[Guest]: So, the bad loans were at some 7.15% and after the merger, they've increased to 10%.
[Guest]: So, you know, what is the point in merging, you know, five weak banks with a strong bank
[Guest]: and making that strong bank a weak bank?
[Guest]: Now, this is a solution which is now being offered, you know,
[Guest]: wherein the principal economic advisor to the Ministry of Finance, Sanjeev Sanyal, recently said
[Guest]: that the number of banks will come down to 10 to 15.
[Guest]: But some of these banks, you know, Indian Overseas Bank is one, IDBI Bank,
[Guest]: they have bad loan rates of 23-24%.
[Guest]: I mean, the question is, why are these banks still in the business of banking?
[Guest]: I mean, if you're losing, you know, one-fourth of all that you're lending,
[Guest]: I mean, clearly you're not good at what you're doing.
[Guest]: I mean, and if you continue, I mean, you'll continue to lose money
[Guest]: and the government will have to continue to recapitalize you.
[Guest]: So, you know, you need the government to make some of these big decisions
[Guest]: which they have not up until now.
[Amit Varma]: And again, NPAs, bank loans, we've discussed this in previous episodes.
[Guest]: I mean, or look at something as simple as, you know,
[Guest]: all the railway accidents that are happening.
[Guest]: Now, people say that, you know, accidents are happening
[Guest]: and we are building bullet trains.
[Guest]: I don't think that is the right comparison.
[Guest]: The right comparison is that accidents are happening
[Guest]: and we continue to run Air India
[Guest]: because the bullet train will be built whenever it will be built, okay.
[Guest]: Air India is there right now.
[Guest]: The organization continues to lose money.
[Guest]: And every rupee that Air India essentially loses
[Guest]: is money that gets, you know, taken away from something else.
[Amit Varma]: Taken from us, I mean, most people think of government and government money
[Amit Varma]: as something that has nothing to do with us, but actually it's our money.
[Guest]: No, no, it's taken someone's paying for it.
[Guest]: You and I are paying for it and we are in fact filing those returns three times a month.
[Guest]: I mean, or you look at the fact that,
[Guest]: I mean, this is something that I wrote for Pragati,
[Guest]: wherein, and you gave a great headline on the price of petrol and diesel.
[Guest]: You know, why are there so many taxes on petrol and diesel?
[Guest]: I mean, this is because, you know,
[Guest]: you have the government needs to support companies like Air India
[Guest]: and this one called Hindustan Photo Films, which we keep talking about.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, I think you and I have it the wrong way around.
[Amit Varma]: We seem to imagine that the government is there to serve the nation.
[Guest]: No, the nation is there to serve the government.
[Amit Varma]: So, net-net, then would it be fair to say that when the Modi government came in,
[Amit Varma]: at least on the economic front, there was a lot of optimism among a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: that they will do a lot of reforms.
[Amit Varma]: And what has happened is that they haven't done most of the reforms we expected from them
[Amit Varma]: or showed the intent to do them.
[Amit Varma]: And furthermore, with a bad policy like DEMON and a botched implementation of GST,
[Amit Varma]: they've actually set the nation backwards.
[Amit Varma]: And hopefully, we can now sort of start getting back on track.
[Amit Varma]: And as Modi ji would say, there are some positive indicators.
[Amit Varma]: So, if you're listening to this podcast and you can't afford tomatoes, eat tractors instead.
[Amit Varma]: On that note, Vivek, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me over, Aman.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode,
[Amit Varma]: do check out the archives of The Scene and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: I've got one previous episode on demonetization.
[Amit Varma]: I've got two episodes on GST.
[Amit Varma]: I've got one episode on NPAs,
[Amit Varma]: where Vivek was, in fact, sharing a lot of insight on that.
[Amit Varma]: Check those episodes out.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Vivek on Twitter at call underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me at Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-E-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much.
[Unknown]: Thanks so much.